# Push Down Automata (PDAs)

DFAs and NFAs are finite state machines and that turns out to be too limiting

Even simple languages like $\{a^nb^n\ |\ n вүҘ 0\}$ are too complicated

What we want is some way to remember things about the input that weвҖҷve seen so far which
can be arbitrarily long

## Recap: Context Free Languages

- A language class larger than the class of regular languages
- Generated by context free grammars
- Can you provide a Type-3 grammar to produce palindromes from $ОЈ = \{a,b\}$
- Can you provide a Type-3 grammar to produce parenthesized expressions from $ОЈ = \{(,a,b,)\}$
- Think about HTML tags. Nested scopes in programming languages. If-then-else structures.

It is not possible to design finite automata for every context-free language. For instance the recognizer for the language $ПүПү^R\ |\ Пү вҲҲ ОЈ^{\ast}$ should contain a memory. We can design a pushdown automaton for every context-free language.

Note: The language $ПүПү^R\ |\ Пү вҲҲ ОЈ^{\ast}$ consists of all strings obtained by concatenating a string with its reverse.  
Such strings are symmetric and form **even-length (not all)** palindromes.

#### Pushdown Automata

A pushdown automaton is similar in some respects to a finite automaton but has an auxiliary memory that operates according to the rules of a stack. The default mode in a pushdown automaton (PDA) is to allow nondeterminism, and unlike the case of finite automata, the nondeterminism cannot always be eliminated.

PDAs are not deterministic. Input strip is only used to read input while the stack can be written and read from.

## Formal Definition of a PDA

A pushdown automaton (PDA) is a 6-tuple $M = (S,ОЈ,О“,Оҙ,s_0,F)$, where:
- S: A finite, non-empty set of states where $s вҲҲ S$.
- ОЈ: Input alphabet (a finite, non-empty set of symbols)
- О“: Stack alphabet
- $s_0 вҲҲ S$: An initial state, an element of S.
- Оҙ: The state-transition function $Оҙ вҠҶ (S Г— ОЈ вҲӘ \{О»\} Г— О“ вҲӘ \{О»\}) Г— (S Г— О“^{\ast})$
- F: The set of final states where $F вҠҶ S$.

NOTE:
- О“: the set of symbols that can be stored in the stack. 
- Оҙ: (current state, input symbol, stack top) вҶ’ (next state, stack replacement)

## Transitions

Below are several example transitions from state q to state r on input a, along with their corresponding diagram representations and interpretations.

1. q вҖ”вҖ”вҖ” a, О» вҶ’ О» вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”> r&emsp;&emsp;ignore the stack
2. q вҖ”вҖ”вҖ” a, О» вҶ’ c вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”> r&emsp;&emsp;push c onto the stack
3. q вҖ”вҖ”вҖ” a, b вҶ’ О» вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”> r&emsp;&emsp;pop b from (the top of) the stack
4. q вҖ”вҖ”вҖ” a, b вҶ’ c вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”> r&emsp;&emsp;replace b with c

You can also define transitions that do not read any character from the input tape and instead perform only stack operations.

5. q вҖ”вҖ”вҖ” О», О» вҶ’ c вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”> r&emsp;&emsp;donвҖҷt read anything, just push c onto the stack
6. q вҖ”вҖ”вҖ” О», c вҶ’ О» вҖ”вҖ”вҖ”> r&emsp;&emsp;donвҖҷt read anything, just pop c from the stack

## Revisit NFA/DFA

Every NFA can be viewed as a PDA that never uses its stack, but PDAs can recognize strictly more languages because of their stack memory.  
DFA = NFA вҠҠ PDA

## An example

$L = (ПүcПү^R\ |\ Пү вҲҲ \{a,b\}^{\ast})$  
$M = (S,ОЈ,О“,Оҙ,s_0,F)$  
$S = \{s_0,f\}$  
$ОЈ = \{a,b,c\}$  
$О“ = \{a,b\}$  
$F = \{f\}$  
$Оҙ = \{[(s_0,a,О»),(s_0,a)],[(s_0,b,О»),(s_0,b)],[(s_0,c,О»),(f,О»)],[(f,a,a),(f,О»)],[(f,b,b),(f,О»)]\}$


| state | tape      | stack | trans. rule         |
|-------|-----------|-------|---------------------|
| $s_0$ | abb c bba | О»     |  [($s_0$,a,О»),($s_0$,a)] |
| $s_0$ | bb c bba  | a     |  [($s_0$,b,О»),($s_0$,b)] |
| $s_0$ | b c bba   | ba    |  [($s_0$,b,О»),($s_0$,b)] |
| $s_0$ | c bba     | bba   |  [($s_0$,c,О»),(f,О»)]     |
| f     | bba       | bba   |  [(f,b,b),(f,О»)]         |
| f     | ba        | ba    |  [(f,b,b),(f,О»)]         |
| f     | a         | a     |  [(f,a,a),(f,О»)]         |
| f     | О»         | О»     |                          |

$G = (N,ОЈ,n_0,вҶҰ)$  
$N = \{S\}$  
$ОЈ = \{a,b,c\}$  
$n_0 = S$  
$\langle S \rangle ::= a \langle S \rangle a\ |\ b \langle S \rangle b\ |\ c$

## Recap: Formal Definition of a PDA

A pushdown automaton (PDA) is a 6-tuple $M = (S,ОЈ,О“,Оҙ,s_0,F)$, where:
- S: A finite, non-empty set of states where $s вҲҲ S$.
- ОЈ: Input alphabet (a finite, non-empty set of symbols)
- О“: Stack alphabet
- $s_0 вҲҲ S$: An initial state, an element of S.
- Оҙ: The state-transition function $Оҙ вҠҶ (S Г— ОЈ вҲӘ \{О»\} Г— О“ вҲӘ \{О»\}) Г— (S Г— О“^{\ast})$
- F: The set of final states where $F вҠҶ S$.

#### Definitions

Push: To add a symbol to the stack [(p,u,О»),(q,a)]  

Pop: To remove a symbol from the stack [(p,u,a),(q,О»)]  

Configuration: An element of $S Г— ОЈ^{\ast} Г— О“^{\ast}$. For instance (q,xyz,abc) where a is the top of
the stack, c is the bottom of the stack. 

Instantaneous description (or snapshot) (to yield in one step):  
Let $[(p,u,ОІ),(q,Оі)] вҲҲ Оҙ$ and $вҲҖx вҲҲ ОЈ^{\ast} вҲ§ вҲҖОұ вҲҲ О“^{\ast}$  
$(p,ux,ОІОұ) вҠў_M  (q,x,ОіОұ)$  
Here u is read from the input tape and ОІ is read from the stack while Оі is written to the stack.

#### Definitions

$(p,ux,ОІОұ) вҠў_M  (q,x,ОіОұ)$  

Let ${вҠў_M}^{\ast}$ be the reflexive transitive closure of $вҠў_M$ and let $Пү вҲҲ ОЈ^{\ast}$ and $s_0$ be the initial state.  
For M automaton to accept Пү string:

$(s,Пү,О»){вҠў_M}^{\ast}(p,О»,О»)$ and $p вҲҲ F$  
$C_0 = (s,Пү,О»)$ and $C_n = (p,О»,О»)$ where $C_0 вҠў_M C_1вҠў_M ... вҠў_M C_{n-1} вҠў_M C_n$

This operation is called *computation* of automaton M, this computation involves n steps.

Let L(M) be the set of string accepted by M.  
$L(M) = \{ Пү\ |\ (s,Пү,О») {вҠў_M}^{\ast} (p,О»,О») вҲ§ p вҲҲ F \}$

## Example #2

$xx^R\ |\ x вҲҲ \{a,b\}^{\ast}$  
$M = (S,ОЈ,О“,Оҙ,s_0,F)$  
$Оҙ = \{[(s_0,a,О»),(s_0,a)],[(s_0,b,О»),(s_0,b)],[(s_0,О»,О»),(f,О»)],[(f,a,a),(f,О»)],[(f,b,b),(f,О»)]\}$

Behaves almost like the previous PDA except that it non-deterministically вҖңguessesвҖқ when it is
at the middle of the input string.

3 possibilities:

- length is odd and middle symbol is a вҖңaвҖқ
- length is odd and middle symbol is a вҖңbвҖқ
- length is even

| state | tape      | stack | trans. rule         |
|-------|-----------|-------|---------------------|
| $s_0$ | abbbba | О»     |  [($s_0$,a,О»),($s_0$,a)] |
| $s_0$ | bbbba  | a     |  [($s_0$,b,О»),($s_0$,b)] |
| $s_0$ | bbba   | ba    |  [($s_0$,b,О»),($s_0$,b)] |
| $s_0$ | bba    | bba   |  [($s_0$,О»,О»),(f,О»)]     |
| f     | bba    | bba   |  [(f,b,b),(f,О»)]         |
| f     | ba     | ba    |  [(f,b,b),(f,О»)]         |
| f     | a      | a     |  [(f,a,a),(f,О»)]         |
| f     | О»      | О»     |                          |

$G = (N,ОЈ,n_0,вҶҰ)$  
$N = \{S\}$  
$ОЈ = \{a,b\}$  
$n_0 = S$  
$\langle S \rangle ::= a \langle S \rangle a\ |\ b \langle S \rangle b\ |\ aa\ |\ bb$

## Deterministic PDA

1. $вҲҖs вҲҲ S вҲ§ вҲҖОі вҲҲ О“$ if $Оҙ(s,О»,Оі) вү  вҲ… вҮ’ Оҙ(s,Пғ,Оі) = вҲ…;вҲҖПғ вҲҲ ОЈ$
2. if $a вҲҲ ОЈ вҲӘ {О»}$ then $вҲҖs,вҲҖy$ and $вҲҖa\ |Оҙ(s,a,Оі)|вүӨ1$

- In a DPDA
  1. If there exists a lambda transition no other transitions should be present for any other input.
  2. There should be a unique transition for any (s,Пғ,Оі) tuple
- For nondeterministic PDA, the equivalence problem to deterministic PDA is proven to be
undecidable.
- It is proved in 1997 that the equivalence problem for deterministic
pushdown automata (DPDA) is decidable. That is, given two DPDAs A and B, it is
possible to determine whether they accept the same language L(A) = L(B).
- The way a DPDA works is exactly the same as an NPDA, with several modes of
acceptance: acceptance on final state, acceptance on empty stack, and acceptance on
final state and empty stack.
- However, unlike a NPDA, these acceptance methods are not equivalent. It can be shown
that the set of languages accepted on empty stack is a proper subset of the set of
languages determined on final state.
- Any regular language can be accepted by a DPDA on empty stack
- Any language accepted by a DPDA on final state is unambiguous, note that the reverse
may not hold all the time.

#### An example language that can only be recognized by an NPDA

The set of palindromes is unambiguous, but not deterministic. The language of even length
palindromes $ПүПү^R$ cannot be recognized by a DPDA, it can only be recognized by an NPDA.

#### An example language that can be recognized by an DPDA

$\{a^nb^n\ |\ n вүҘ 0\}$ can be accepted by a DPDA on empty stack, and the language is not regular.

Every language recognized by a DPDA can also be recognized by an NPDA, but the converse is not true. Therefore, deterministic context-free languages form a proper subset of context-free languages.

#### Example #3

$Пү вҲҲ \{\{Оұ,ОІ\}^{\ast}\ |\ \#(a) = \#(b)\}$
$M = (S,ОЈ,О“,Оҙ,s_0,F)$  
$Оҙ = \{[(s_0,О»,О»),(q,c)],[(q,a,c),(q,ac)],[(q,a,a),(q,aa)],[(q,a,b),(q,О»)],[(q,b,c),(q,bc)],[(q,b,b),(q,bb)],$
$[(q,b,a),(q,О»)],[(q,О»,c),(f,О»)]\}$

| state | tape      | stack | trans. rule         |
|-------|-----------|-------|---------------------|
| $s_0$ | abbbabaa  | О»     | [($s_0$,О»,О»),(q,c)] |
| q     | abbbabaa  | c     | [(q,a,c),(q,ac)]    |
| q     | bbbabaa   | ac    | [(q,b,a),(q,О»)]     |
| q     | bbabaa    | c     | [(q,b,c),(q,bc)]    |
| q     | babaa     | bc    | [(q,b,b),(q,bb)]    |
| q     | abaa      | bbc   | [(q,a,b),(q,О»)]     |
| q     | baa       | bc    | [(q,b,b),(q,bb)]    |
| q     | aa        | bbc   | [(q,a,b),(q,О»)]     |
| q     | a         | bc    | [(q,a,b),(q,О»)]     |
| q     | О»         | c     | [(q,О»,c),(f,О»)]     |
| f     | О»         | О»     |                     |



