**(1)** Consider the following grammar  

S → AB | BC  
B → AB | BC  
AB → ab  
BC → bc  
A → a  
C → c  

(a) State the Chomsky type of this grammar.

(b) **Heuristically**, state the **most simple** regular expression (using the basic set of regex operators) for the language that is generated by this grammar.  

(c) Providethemost simple Type-3 grammar for this language.

---

**(2)** Consider the following requirement set for a dumb turnstile machine:  
- Turnstile machine is “locked” by default.
- User can push one of the following coins at once to the machine: 25,50,100.
- Machine checks the coins presented to the machine so far and
  - either waits for additional coins if the amount of credits is not enough,
  - or unlocks to let the maximum amount of people possible to pass one by one,
  - Once total credits exceed the amount necessary to let one person pass, machine lets the maximum amount of people pass,  returns change, and goes back to its initial state.
- The amount of credits required for a single person to pass is 30.
- Machine will not accept any coins while it is unlocked.

Examples:  
- If the user initially inputs 25, machine will stay locked and wait for additional credits.
- If the user initially inputs 100, machine will let 3 people pass, return 10 with the last person (warning: it is not possible to pay 100 and let a single person pass in this machine).

Define and explain each element in the following sets and draw the diagram for this machine using the Mealy
Model.

(a) Input alphabet of your design

(b) Output alphabet of your design

(c) State machine diagram

---

**(3)** Assume that R, S and T are languages defined over the same Σ. Consider the following statement and answer the questions:  
$R^{\ast} ∪ (S ∩ T)^{\ast} ⊆ (R ∪ S)^{\ast} ∩ (R ∪ T)^{\ast}$

(a) Prove the given statement.  
(b) Provide a counterexample to show that $R^{\ast} ∪ (S ∩ T)^{\ast}\ ⊅\ (R ∪ S)^{\ast} ∩ (R ∪ T)^{\ast}$

---

**(4)** Consider a formal language that includes the following strings:

$λ,ac,aabcc,aaabccc,aaaabbcccc,aaaaabbccccc,...$

but not the following strings (some examples are given as regular expressions to represent multiple strings):

$a^+,c^+,aa^+cc^+,b,abc,aaaa^+bcccc^+,bb,abbc,aabbcc,aaabbccc,...$

and also it does not include any string in which distinct leters do not follow alphabetical order

(a) Is this a regular language? Why so/why not?  

(b) Heuristically provide an expression to define this language  

(c) Heuristically, provide a grammar of the most restricted type possible to produce this language

---

**(5)** Let A and B be languages defined over Σ. Show that the following expressions hold. If they do not hold, give a counterexample.

(a) $A^{\ast}B^{\ast} ∩ B^{\ast}A^{\ast} = A^{\ast} ∪ B^{\ast}$

(b) $A^+A^+ = A^+$

(c) $(A^{\ast}B^{\ast})^{\ast} = (B^{\ast}A^{\ast})^{\ast}$

(d) $(AB)^{\ast} = (BA)^{\ast}$

---

**(6)** Given the language L = {ab, aa, baa}, which of the following string(s) are in $L^{\ast}$? Explain your answers.

(a) abaabaaabaa

(b) aaaabaaaa

(c) baaaaabaaaab

(d) baaaaabaa

(e) λ